Good morning and welcome
to Debugging in Xcode.
What we'll cover this morning,
first we'll have a bit of a tour
of debugging services in Xcode,
and then we'll talk about how
to use custom data formatters,
a little bit of how you
write the various formatters.
Has anyone here actually customized
any of the data formatters other
than people that work at Apple?
Well, hopefully we'll increase that
number after today's talk.
Then we're going to talk about guard
malloc and how you use that with Xcode.
And then we'll cover "Fix and
Continue" enhancements that
are new in Xcode 1.5 and 2.0.
In fact, everything we're going to talk
about today is in Xcode 1.5 and 2.0.
And then we're going to do
a little remote debugging.
We'll talk about the setup and
show you what you can do with it.
And of course,
we have lots of demos for you.
So getting started.
The debugging service is in Xcode.
We have, of course, a graphical UI.
That graphical UI is shared by the
Java debugger and our C code debugger.
That C-based code debugger is GDB.
So when you're debugging your C code,
it acts as a GUI interface to GDB.
Of course it has Thread Picker.
You can view your stack, variables,
and also we have an expressions window.
You can also set and remove
breakpoints right in your code,
right in the gutter there.
You can click on your breakpoint,
it'll remove it.
Set one if there isn't one there already.
You can control-click and
get a little menu item so you
can disable it if you want.
And of course you can control
your program execution.
There are toolbar items for stepping,
starting, restarting,
and of course there are menu items which
you can bind your own key shortcuts to.
And of course it lets you access
the cool features like "FiX and
Continue" and remote debugging.
Now,
our support for non-C-based languages
include AppleScript and Java,
which are not the topic of this talk.
So let's do a little tour now.
Go to the demo machine,
and we'll show you what we have.
First we'll open up Sketch.
It's launching a little slowly
because we're booted off of one of
those tiny FireWire hard drives.
So one of the first things
you'll probably want to do
is to edit your executable.
In the executable inspector,
you can change the arguments that you're
going to be passing to your executable.
So-- and also your environment variables.
So you can create sets of these,
and then toggle them
on and off as you like.
However, if you get too many,
it's a little difficult to
manage large sets of them.
So you might want to go ahead and create
a new executable item in your project.
And then you can name it appropriately,
and then debug it that way.
So let's start up the debugger here.
We'll click the Debug button.
When we hit our first breakpoint,
we'll disable that here
in the breakspoint panel.
and continue.
So here's Sketch running.
And we'll open up a
document I made before.
And go back, enable our breakpoint.
And now when I interact with the program,
we see that we hit the
breakpoint in the debugger,
and up here above the stack in the
column header is a little pop-up,
and it says "Thread 1."
If there's more than one thread,
then the pop-up will be active,
and you can switch
between the other threads.
Then the stack will update,
the variables will update,
and your source will
update to reflect that.
So you'll notice that some of these stack
frames are grayed out and some are bold.
If they're bold,
that means we have symbols for them
so that we can show you source lines
and your variables that are in them.
If they're grayed out,
we don't have symbols,
but we'll go ahead and show
you the disassembly down
where the source view is.
So let's go back to the top of the stack.
And if you want to view the
disassembly with your source,
go up here to the Debug menu,
and you can toggle the
disassembly display.
In the seed,
you're going to need to click on the
stack frame that you're looking at,
and then it'll update the PC pointer
over in the disassembly view.
But here we have your source code and
your disassembly in the same view.
And if we go up to the
toolbar and we do--
Step over instruction,
you'll see that the PC and
the disassembly is changing
as we go through the code,
but those lines that we're
stepping through are all
on the same line of source.
If you do a step over,
you'll see that we've stepped
over in the source view,
and then the PC and the disk
assembly is also updated.
Now,
if you'll notice in the variable view,
We have variable graphics here.
It's an NSArray, and it's just been set,
as you can see from the source
code where our breakpoint is.
Whenever value changes between stepping,
we'll highlight it in red for
you so it's easier to see.
If we step again, you'll see that "i" has
changed and highlighted in red.
So now we can actually go and edit the
value of "i" and we can set it to 4.
And just to prove to
you that it's set to 4,
for those of you that
don't like the GDB console,
you can avert your eyes now.
We can open the console,
print "i," and sure enough,
it's been set to 4, as you would expect.
As you can see,
that's not going to be a good idea
because we're going to iterate
through our for loop there,
and we'd probably cause an
exception as we access the array.
So we can drag the PC back and then
execute that line of code again.
Just another way,
we could have gone and edited
that value and set it to 3 again.
But it's a useful technique to
be able to move the PC if you've
accidentally gone past a line of
code that you want to step into.
Say there's a function you wanted to
step into and you've gone past it.
You can simply drag the PC back
and then click "Step Into."
So with graphics,
we see that it's in NSArray,
and it's telling us that
there are three objects,
but there isn't much
more information there.
So what we can do is,
using contextual menu, we can print the
description to the console.
The console automatically
comes up for us.
And if we scroll up to the top,
where it displays the variable,
we see that NSArrays have a description
where they'll give us the count and
then tell us what the values are.
And then it'll go through each element of
the array and do a description on those.
And we see that the elements
inside the array each have
a very verbose description,
giving us the bounds,
the class-- in this case,
it's a circle-- and
some other attributes.
Now,
I like my GDB prompt to be a little bold,
so we can go to the debugger preferences.
And we can set the font size.
And we can change it to bold.
Then click "Apply."
So you can go through and you
can customize your standard in,
standard out.
You can have different fonts if you want,
different colors even.
And as you can see over here
in the source code view,
I've actually changed the instruction
pointer highlighting to a light green.
You may have been seeing
red in all the other demos.
One other important item to keep in
mind is that we have key bindings.
So if you don't like the
default key bindings for the
various debugger functions,
the stepping, that sort of thing,
you can define your own.
Now let's go back to slides.
As I click-- one more.
And you also see that when
we're running the debugger,
and if you were to quit Xcode, we say,
oh, we're running.
This also works for the run panel.
It's been much requested,
and that's fixed in Xcode 1.5 and 2.0.
So let's go back to slides.
Custom data formatters.
We introduced them a year ago.
And how many of you know when
you're looking at a custom data
formatter in the variable view?
Of course, the Apple guys.
So basically they'll let you
summarize the information so you
don't have to turn down the variable.
For instance,
structures can get quite long.
You can summarize exactly
what you want to see.
It saves vertical space,
which is very precious
on a lot of screens.
And you can add your own
custom text to the data values.
And you can also evaluate expressions.
You can make calls to functions
as part of your simple
expression data formatters,
and you can also create custom plugins,
which can be more complex.
Now, custom data formatters,
they're bound to a type.
So if you change the variable
formatter for one-- change the
formatter for one variable,
it's going to change the formatter
for all variables of that type.
Just something to keep in mind.
We have about 35 Carbon formatters.
For instance, OS error, FSREF,
and some structures.
And we have about 35
foundation formatters as well.
For instance, you saw NSArray.
We tell you the count of objects.
In this dictionary,
we tell you the number of keys.
We have formatters for NSPoint, NSRec,
some of the AppKit structures.
Now your user customizations are
all stored in your home directory:
~library, application support, Apple,
developer tools, custom data views,
customdataviews.plist.
So if you have a great set that you
want to share with other people,
you can give it to them,
they can then insert it in the
same place in their home directory.
And then they'll have the same
data formatters that you have.
And for plugin support,
you should look at the
dataformatterplugin.h file,
which is actually inside
the Xcode.app app wrapper.
So you have to search down inside that,
probably with terminal,
or you can use open
package contents in Finder.
Now, summary formatters,
they're lower overhead
than the other formatters.
They're basically percolating
values that we've already fetched,
or are easy to fetch, into the summary.
The recursive.
So if you have one formatter for
one structure that has another
structure that also has a formatter,
then that formatter can be used as well,
and you don't have to drill all
the way down into those children.
The basic format of a summary
formatter is a child path
surrounded in percent signs,
colon, and then a referenced column.
Now the child path is a dot-delimited
path to the child data value,
a lot like you would
reference a structure in C.
In C++,
child paths can leave out private,
protected, and public.
You don't have to reference those.
We'll skip those automatically for you.
Now the reference columns all refer
to the columns in the variable view.
For instance,
there's the name variable column.
There's the value column, the type,
and the summary column.
So this is going to reference which
of those columns of the variable
you want to display in your summary.
We'll cover that in a little more detail.
So here's an example
where we have an NSPoint,
has two elements, an X and a Y.
And you might write a formatter
that looks a little bit like this.
So you might have X equals
percent X percent and Y equals,
which is some custom text.
You could put anything there.
And then percent Y percent.
And it might look something like
that in the variable display.
I have a similar thing for an NS size,
where you reference the
width and the height,
surrounded by percent signs,
and some custom text before or after it.
And that would display
something like this.
As we talked about before,
they're recursive.
So if you have an NSRect,
which has an origin,
which has an NSPoint,
and an NSSize as two
elements of that structure,
you can simply reference those elements
and their data formatters will be used.
So you might have custom text,
parentheses surrounding,
a reference to the origin,
as well as the size.
And then it would look something
like this in the variable display.
Now, expression formatters
are a bit more complex.
They're higher overhead,
because you're actually asking
GDB to go execute some code
or do some logic for you.
Usually you're executing a function
and that can have side effects,
since you're actually
evaluating something in GDB.
So if your variable formatter
has something like I++ in it,
then I will increment.
And if I is a variable in the stack,
it'll have changed.
So be careful what you do.
You might also be able to do
something interesting with that.
And you should always cast your
expression formatter to the correct type.
GDB can be a little unhappy if it
doesn't know the type for the return
value of the expression you're calling.
So it's always safest
to cast the proper type.
If you don't enter the type
and the formatter doesn't work,
cast the proper type and try again.
and avoid taking locks.
Avoid anything that will take a lock,
avoid anything that might need a lock.
It's just not a good idea to
do that in your expressions.
and avoid taking locks.
Avoid anything that will take a lock,
avoid anything that might need a lock.
It's just not a good idea to
do that in your expressions.
The dollar sign "var" is used
to reference your variable in
the expression that you write.
Now you want to think--you can think of
your expression formatter as though it
were a variable of the type that you've
cast it to in the variable display.
So if it's a char star,
char stars happen to show up
always in the summary column.
So we'll get to an example
of that in a minute.
For an NSArray,
if you've ever gone and double-clicked
on the summary column of an NSArray,
you might have seen the formatter
looks sort of like this.
So we have some custom text.
We have curly braces
surrounding our expression.
Dollar sign bars replaced by
the actual variable when it's
passed to GDB for evaluation.
So we get back an integer,
which we're casting to be safe.
And we're casting-- we're
We're including ":v" at the end,
just to be pedantic.
It's the default.
If you don't include
any reference column,
then that's the default.
So, just for correctness.
Now you could do this type of formatter
for a bool if you were tired of seeing
ones and zeros for all your bools.
You wanted to see true and false,
because that's what you're
used to programming it as.
Or you might want to see it as
yes and no if you're into Cocoa.
So here again we have
our custom expression,
and we're casting it to a char star.
And because we're casting
it to a char star,
we need to reference the summary column.
So for an STL string,
for a standard template library string,
If you have a simple
null-terminated string,
you could use a formatter like
this to be able to view that
string in the summary column.
So here we're simply
calling--have some custom text,
C string equals curly brace,
casting our expression to a char star,
$var.C_STR function call.
Close it up and end it with colon S.
Now for custom data formatter plugins,
you can do more complex things.
Basically allows you to do a custom
print for a debugger on types
that you may not have access to,
or somebody's given you a framework and
they don't have custom debugger printing.
It's automatically used.
So once you create one of these bundles,
in it is a plist that
specifies which type it's for,
and Xcode will automatically use
that data formatter for that type.
And this code runs in your program.
So you want to be careful
what you're doing.
If you're not comfortable with
allocating memory or being careful
that you're not overrunning the
buffers that you're creating,
then you might want to
be careful with these.
Be sure to handle invalid input.
Oftentimes these variable formatters
will be called before your
variables have been initialized,
so you want to be safe
with what you're doing.
Now in order to create a
custom data formatter plugin,
you need to start with a new project.
We'll have a demo of this,
so you don't need to write it all down.
Then you need to add
a bundle target to it.
For instance, a Cocoa bundle.
And then you'll need to
add a header search path.
In this case,
you can see that it crawls down into
the Xcode application app bundle itself.
That's where the
dataformatterplugin.h lives.
This way we can simply reference #include
dataformatterplugin.h in our code.
And then you also need to add a
custom data formatter views.plist.
This is the plist I was talking
about that specifies which type
this custom data formatter is for,
and also what summary string to use.
So here we see dictionary with a key,
which is bool,
and that's the type that this
formatter will be used for.
And then summary string is the next key,
and that's the summary string that
will be used in the summary column.
So in this case we're
calling myBulletDescription.
$var is going to be replaced
with the actual variable.
$id is used by Xcode to
[Transcript missing]
Up top we see that we have a pointer
to our PBX GDB plugin functions.
Those are the plugin functions
that we support for you.
And we declare our function,
which is myBullDescriptor.
And we have our type,
which is bool and int for the
identifier for that memory call.
And if you look at the code,
we see that if a bool is yes,
then we're going to construct
this print function.
which is going to concept
the message for us,
allocate some memory,
and take care of managing that for us
so we can return any string we want.
Now we have Jim Ingham on to give
us a demo of custom data formatters.
Can we have this one?
Okay.
So, we're going to go over these kind of
in order of dangerousness from not
very dangerous to very dangerous.
Let me open these.
So the ones that are the percent ones,
that's really doing nothing.
That's just taking information
that's already fetched on
your behalf and using it.
So I'll show you those.
Those, you know,
you can play around with those for free.
They're really, it's really nice.
You can go in and, you know,
as you're looking at something, you know,
change it for a little while,
change it back.
They're really easy once you get,
the syntax is straightforward,
just like your C syntax.
And kind of once you get
into the habit of just,
"Oh, I want to see these two fields now.
Oh, I want to see these two fields
now." It really becomes an
interactive thing that you can
go and do as you're going along.
It's really a nice workflow, I think.
Okay, so let me find somewhere
interesting that I want to be.
So we got Sketch again.
That's what we're using as our
example all the time this year.
So I'm here somewhere.
So I have this bounds,
which has got custom
data formatters already,
you can see.
If you want to see what the custom
data formatter is for anything,
remember, you just double-click on it
and it'll show you what the
current data formatter is.
But maybe my--what I like is to keep my
value column fairly small because I have,
you know, a lot of strings or something
like that in the summary field.
I want to make that big.
So we chose to put this
particular set of custom data
formatters in the value column,
and that's annoying to me.
I don't want to do that.
So I want to move it over
to the summary column.
So that's--that's what I'll
show you how to do first.
So that's pretty straightforward.
Let me actually do it for the
constituent elements first.
So a bounds has, you know,
a point and a--and a size.
So let's take this one,
and you can just copy it from here and
double-click and put it over there.
So now it's going to show up over there.
So that's all you have to do.
And, you know,
it's a little bit of a challenge,
but once you get used to it,
this is something that's mine, right?
You can really change in a nice
way all the stuff that you view.
So I put this one over here, right?
Then now I've got redundant information,
so maybe there's something
else I'm interested in here.
Like, since it's a structure,
maybe I want to see what the
address of the structure is.
So that one would be pretty
straightforward to do,
too.
That's going to be an expression
because we didn't fetch the
address of the structure in
a way that you can get at it.
So--but you just write an
ordinary C expression surrounded
by the curly brackets.
That's our little syntax which
says this is an expression
I'm going to send to GDB,
and I'm just getting, you know,
the address of that array.
For some reason,
it's not updating right away,
but it'll update in a second.
Don't worry.
And then maybe I'll do the
same thing here because--well,
I don't know, but-- because I said
so in the demo script.
Okay, so I've got that.
But then notice over here,
so this is the deal with the
columns that's a little bit
confusing at first but it's
actually pretty straight forward.
You know,
I changed the value contents of the
origin structure that was contained
within this bound structure.
So then all of a sudden,
what started showing up as the
summary for origin in the bounds
structure that contained origin
is that address that I wrote in.
And the reason for that is because
the summary here that I'm getting
is coming from the value column by
default because I haven't put a colon,
which column am
I referencing in the origin,
right, which is this one,
that I'm pulling the formatter out from.
So if I want this to come
now from the summary column,
because again, I've moved the summary
column to the value column,
and I've moved the information
I'm interested in from the value
column to the origin column,
then I have to say that's
from the summary column.
And the same thing here.
I have to say that's
from the summary column.
So now that shows the contents
from the summary column,
which is the one I want
for the outer summary.
So again, I can move this over here.
And I don't know, you know,
I could take this one and put it over
here just to make everything look pretty.
So, okay, so that's the two things.
One, you know, double-click to find them.
That's how you discover them.
The notion of, you know,
when you have a substructure
like this origin substructure,
you can use it in the parent
just by referring to it.
And again,
the column says in the substructure
that I'm pulling values out from,
which column am I referencing?
Like,
am I referencing the stuff that's here,
or am I referencing the stuff that's
here in the formatter up here?
Okay.
So that's pretty straightforward.
Uh... okay, cool.
So now,
I don't want to stop here anymore.
Uh... okay, cool.
So now,
I don't want to stop here anymore.
Now I have source.
Yay!
Okay.
So the next thing I want to
stop at is... I think I want
[Transcript missing]
Here's another place, like,
my document is a type that's mine, and,
you know, it's the one in Sketch that
contains the circles and
squares and so on and so forth.
So, I actually might want to see some
useful pieces of information about it,
like, in this case,
maybe what I want to see is,
how many circles do I have and
how many squares do I have?
That might actually be a
useful piece of information.
So, it turns out that what the document
contains is actually NSArrays,
and it contains an NSArray of circles
and it contains an NSArray of squares.
And then it has an accessor method
called "rectangles" to get the NSArray.
So, there's no way that I'm going
to find out those numbers by,
you know, grubbing around in structures,
because NSArrays hide from me
where the number of elements is.
And my little accessors are such that,
you know, I'm hidden where the
NSArray for rectangles is.
So, I'm going to have to call
some code to do that.
But it's pretty
straightforward accessor code,
so it's really not too much worry.
It's unlikely that I'm
going to crash my program,
you know, calling for circles or squares,
or change its state by getting
the number or something like that.
So, that's the kind of function call
that you can call into the inferior
that's actually pretty safe.
It's not going to do any harm.
On the other hand,
me trying to type while you're
watching me would do infinite harm,
so I'm not going to do that.
I'm just going to -- oh, is it you,
bastard?
This is not going to let me copy.
Oh, you're going to watch me type.
Okay, that's going to be fun.
So, for instance, maybe I just want the
number of circles here,
just to limit your fun.
So, you know,
I have to call to get the number of,
get the array and then get the
number of elements in the array.
So the number of elements in
the array is going to be an int,
Variable, so the dollar var,
that's the thing that I'm
referencing in the document,
and I'm going to have to
get the circles out of that.
I have to get a curly
brace on the outside.
Yep.
So you really don't want me to type here.
And then now I've got the circle,
so that's great.
Note I cast the outermost thing.
This one is going to come back as an in.
That's fine.
And then... So that's the circles.
That's an NSArray, really,
but it's fine to call it an id.
And I'm going to count on that.
You've got an extra square bracket.
Yeah, I probably do.
This is one of those,
you just keep typing until it works.
Okay.
So, yay!
That shows me circles,
and if you wanted to watch
me type in that horribleness,
then I'd do the other one,
but I'm not going to.
Um, I don't amuse myself that much.
So, um, then the other example that, uh,
oh, uh,
Yeah, that's OK.
One other thing to notice,
by the way-- so here, in graphics,
what we have is kind of this
little grayed out version
of the variable formatter,
but we don't have anything.
And the point for that
is what Chris said,
namely that graphics is
actually not initialized yet.
Graphics gets initialized in the next
line of code that we're going to execute.
But this is actually calling, again,
a function.
It's calling count and
something like that.
So in most cases,
GDB is actually-- probably what
happened was that Xcode went and
asked GDB to call this function.
And var contained some junk,
whatever was on the stack at that point.
And that probably crashed,
because calling selector on
some junk generally crashes.
But GDB is pretty good at
cleaning up that sort of crash,
so as long as what goes on in
the functions you call in the
formatters don't change state,
it doesn't really matter too much
if they actually don't go terribly
well when you call them sometimes.
Because GDB just wipes
up the stack and goes,
I didn't see that, and everything's fine.
So you don't have to worry too much.
What you have to worry about is
stuff that might change state or
stuff that might acquire resources.
Because if you have a
multi-threaded program,
these are going to be running.
Another thread might have the resource.
And that's the sort of
thing that'll go badly.
But just a little minor crash,
that really won't affect too much.
So OK.
We want to stop somewhere else.
I'll show you the bool
example that we showed before,
just so that you can see
that it actually does work,
and that you're really calling, you know,
any expression that's valid in your
current language is what you're calling.
Okay,
so here we're somewhere that has a bool,
and that looks really, really ugly,
so let's make that look a little nicer.
So again,
we're going to write an expression.
It's coming back as a char star.
And what we want is, you know,
if the variable is 1,
we're going to return yes.
Yeah, if it's positive,
we're going to return yes,
and otherwise we're going to return no.
The only funky thing about
this is that we had to put
backslashes before the quotes.
And the reason for that is that
this has to be passed down to GDB,
and GDB has a command line
which has certain syntax.
And one of the things is the
quotes delimit arguments.
So if we passed unprotected quotes,
then when they got down to GDB,
GDB would think that those
were argument delimiters,
and the line wouldn't parse
and it'd get all ticked off.
So any time that you're
passing a quote down,
just backslash it.
That's the only one that
you have to worry about.
And again, it's one of those, you know,
you just keep typing it until
it works kind of things.
Chris, why aren't you working?
Hello?
Oh, all my typing just went away.
What did that happen, Chris?
So $var.
Maybe?
No, it's running.
Question mark.
I'll get it.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Got that one.
Isn't typing on stage fun?
Oh, I typed something wrong.
I'm not going to try to type it
right on stage because I can't type.
But anyway, that would show up.
The other one I wanted to show you,
just to make the point,
and this one I can type because
it's pretty straightforward,
just to make the point that you really
are playing with power tools here,
is that you could do something like this.
Okay, that's a nice little expression.
And then, you know, three, four, five.
Okay.
So, you really are changing
the state of your program,
so you want to be careful about that.
Okay,
so then the last thing that we want to
do is show you how to do the plug-ins
where you build your own custom plug-in.
And so as I say, you know,
from the percent ones,
which are just information
we've already fetched,
so there's no way you can screw it up,
to the curly bracket ones,
which you're calling functions and
it's getting a little more dangerous,
to the ones where you're actually
injecting your own code into
whatever program that you happen
to run under the debugger where,
you know,
you're getting really dangerous.
But on the other hand,
if there's stuff that you can't
get from the external level calling
functions or something like that,
or if there's kind of a
formatting that you need to
do which is time-consuming or,
you know,
just grubbing around in some more
stuff than you want to write here,
I mean, these can be valuable.
For instance, the Carbon stuff was
done that way because,
you know, you want to like go and look
through a window and pick out
the 10 things in the window.
So you can actually write in the window
list that are really interesting to you
and format them up in some nice way.
I mean, that's actually--would be tedious
to write in as an expression.
The summary view,
you probably could write some
really long thing that did it,
but you'd surely get it wrong.
Writing it as the plug-in is easier.
So for that,
we have to go and make a new project.
So it's easiest just
to make an empty one.
And I don't know, we'll call it empty.
it on the desktop so I can find it.
So what I want to make the--depending
on--you want to make a bundle because
it's something that's going to
be loadable into your program.
But if, for instance,
you're going to be doing
another Carbon data formatter,
you want to make a Carbon bundle
because that'll set it up so
it'll link to Carbon correctly
and have all the stuff you need.
If you want to view some, you know,
app kit types then you want
to make a Cocoa bundle,
whatever you--whatever the
point of the formatter is.
So we're just going to make a Cocoa one,
a Cocoa loadable bundle,
and we'll call it--
So one of the things that we have to do,
as Chris said,
is we have to go and set the
header search path to point
into this horrible location,
which I nicely put on this thing,
but I can't get it!
Oh, okay.
Anyway.
So you get to watch me type again.
That's roughly right.
We'll just find it out
when it doesn't compile.
So you have to add that search path,
because that's where we store this, the,
the, the,
The data plugin .h file.
And then what you need is the plist
file and you need the C file that
actually implements your code.
So, because I couldn't
possibly type those here,
so I have them already made.
Wake up, little Firewire drive.
Okay, so here's the P list.
No, that's this one here.
Same thing that Chris showed.
We could actually,
within a given plug-in,
define formatters for a whole
bunch of different types.
In this case,
we're only defining one for one type.
And then here's the name of the
function that we're defining,
so we're just, in the same way you would
do any variable formatter,
what's happening is that this code
gets inserted into the target program,
it provides a bunch of functions,
and then you use the normal variable
syntax to call out those functions.
The one thing to be careful about,
of course,
is remember that you're going to be
inserting this into whatever code
you happen to run in the debugger,
so you probably want to be a little
careful about choosing some gnarly name,
like my bool description's
probably not a good choice.
XXXX underscore some numbers and what,
I don't know.
But anyway,
choose something that you're not
going to collide with other symbols.
And then the little ID token,
which is how we manage memory
and resources for each instance
of the running data formatter.
[Transcript missing]
Yeah, we're AppKit.
Okay, wonderful.
Okay, so then you have to find
your build products,
which in our case are here.
And move this into the proper
place for where plugins go.
Where that is, is in your home directory,
library, application support, Apple,
developer tools, custom data views.
So that's where the things should go.
This is, by the way,
where also the custom data plist that
stores the ones that you've typed in,
like the percent ones and the var ones.
They're all actually stored in here.
So if you want to see what you've got,
or if you want to get rid of
them all at once for some reason,
go into the same location.
Just delete that file.
Was that there?
Okay, well, anyway, that was the finder.
I think you have to quit Xcode
to get it to reread these.
It looked like you didn't one time,
but it's a demo,
so I'm not going to try that.
So let me open the two ones I had here.
[Transcript missing]
So what's going on here is just
the breakpoint that I wanted to
stop at was set in a framework,
not in the main app, so...
You have to actually have the framework
open for it to know that they're there.
Let's see.
I put something there.
So it was overriding the default one.
Again,
anything you type in at the console is
going to override any built-in ones.
But then when I deleted it,
it switched back to the default one,
which was calling my function,
and that printed false.
So pretty easy to do.
Let's go back to slides.
We'll go back to slides now.
So, thank you, Jim.
Now, we have some new ways to display
data in Xcode 1.5 and 2.0.
We now display file statics
right in the variable display.
So if there are any file statics-- thank
you-- if there are any file statics,
we'll display the file statics turndown.
If there are no file statics,
then it won't be there,
or if we can't detect any in the symbols.
So it's just like the
arguments and the locals.
If there are no arguments or locals,
then those turndowns don't show
up in the variable display.
So we also have the
Global Variables Browser,
which was shown on Monday.
Once you browse global
variables by library,
you simply go into the debug
menu to Tools and bring up
the Global Variables Browser.
Inside that browser,
you can then search and
filter on the various fields.
Multiple selection doesn't work yet.
We're working on that.
And then you can click in the View column
for the items they actually want
to view in the variable display.
So it's a good way of filtering
down from possibly hundreds or
thousands of global variables that
could be in your program's space,
down to just the ones
you're interested in.
We also have the simple memory browser.
And you can either type in addresses,
you can type in variables,
you can also type in some expressions,
which Jim will probably show us.
So let's get Jim back up here for
file statics and global memory.
Let's have this one again.
Okay, so in this case, you know,
of course,
we're a nice object-oriented application,
so of course we have no
globals and almost no statics.
So actually constructing the demo
is a little bit hard because there
really wasn't much interesting,
but in any case, I can find someplace.
So let's see.
[Transcript missing]
No, well, we stopped there instead.
That's okay.
So if you want to see, well,
this one doesn't have any statics,
but if you want to see globals, again,
there's nothing here right now, but...
[Transcript missing]
So that's that.
Yeah, and then statics just
show up under statics.
I can hit the other breakpoint,
and then I can find statics for you.
So this one actually has some statics.
They're just listed
under the file statics.
So these are the ones that are
defined statics to the file,
and they'll just show
up all automatically.
You don't need to pick
them or anything like that.
So that's that.
And then the third new thing that
I was going to show was that we
now have a little memory browser.
So,
the memory browser,
it'll view memory at whatever address.
So for instance, like $R3 here,
you can type in addresses,
you can type in, you know,
any expression,
$R3 normally stores the object, but,
yeah, I don't know, probably an object,
I can't really tell.
The other thing you can do is, you know,
if you have accessors which are
pulling out stuff and you want
to see the stuff at the accessor,
like for instance, you know,
we pull out the document here.
"So, we could just say self...
Draw a document,
and it's going to resolve it
to whatever the address is,
and then print it.
It doesn't stay live.
It resolves it to the address,
and then it prints the address.
So if you wanted, you know,
to track a location as it changed,
you'd need to reenter the
expression every time.
The other thing is, you know,
you can change how much
you want to display,
you know, bigger or smaller.
This is a little stepper,
so you can step through pages of
memory based on the size that you have.
That's pretty much that.
Okay?
OK?
All right.
Let's go back to slides, please.
So, new in the debug menu,
we've had to reorganize it a little bit.
We have some more menu items for you,
and we want it to still be
able to fit on a 10x7 screen.
As we had before,
we still have Stop on C++,
Catch and Throw.
You can control the disassembly display.
There are actually three modes there.
Whenever in the default mode,
if you click on a stack
frame with source,
it will just show the source.
And then you can do the mixed
view as we showed you earlier.
The third mode is that will show you
only the disassembly whenever you are
clicked on a frame that has symbols.
So if you want to stay
in disassembly mode,
or you don't want to split your screen,
then you can choose that mode.
And then you choose
the mode a fourth time.
You choose that menu item a fourth time,
and then that would get you
back to the original mode.
And that's specified by a check mark
and then a dash next to the menu item
to show you what state you're in.
Now you can enable and disable the
data formatters either using the
contextual menu in the variable
view or in the debug menu.
Under, we have the same contextual
menu that shows up in the
variable view in the debug menu,
and you can select it there.
Now if you're in the middle of
debugging your program and you
disable the data formatters,
you can re-enable them later.
If they're disabled when
your program starts,
then we won't have loaded
our introspection library,
and you'll only get the summary
formatters whenever you enable
the data formatters again.
Just something to keep in mind.
We also have stop on debug
string call and debugger
call right in the debug menu,
so you don't have to go to the executable
inspector and switch it on there.
It is still available there,
and we track the two
and keep them in sync.
And now you can enable guard
malloc right in the debug menu.
All of these settings are
now stored per executable.
Some of those settings used to
be stored per session of Xcode.
So if you had two projects open
and you enabled "Stop on C++,
Throw," then it would be enabled
for all of your programs.
So let's talk about guard
malloc a little bit.
What is it?
Basically,
it causes your program to crash.
And that's a feature.
What it's detecting is it's
detecting memory access exceptions
beyond your allocated buffers.
It can also detect
access of freed buffers.
What it's detecting is it's
detecting memory access exceptions
beyond your allocated buffers.
It can also detect
access of freed buffers.
and then uses the VM system to add guard
pages around your memory allocations.
Now it also overwrites freed memory
with bit patterns so you can detect
when you've read that memory in.
A little bit of an assistant there.
However,
your code's going to run a little bit
slower because it's doing extra memory
allocations in order to put guard pages
around the allocations you've done.
In fact,
it pushes your allocations so that
they end right at the end of a page.
So there could be potentially
more memory being allocated
than what you've asked for.
However, it's still thread-safe,
which is good because a lot of
applications you're writing today have
other threads getting launched for them,
either via AppKit or Carbon.
So how do you use guardMalloc?
Well,
it's best to use it with the debugger,
because it's going to cause
your program to crash on these
memory access exceptions.
So then that'll give you the
backtrace that you can then go use
to find out what the problem is.
As we said earlier,
you enable it in the debug menu.
And this is essentially causing us
to set two environment variables.
The first is dyld_insert_libraries.
And then we specify the
libd_malloc library.
And that will cause libd_malloc
library to be inserted at runtime.
The second is force-flat namespaces.
If your program will not
run with flat namespaces,
then you won't be able
to use guard-malloc.
Again, you debug as normal,
exercise your program,
and then we'll bus error,
throw up an exception,
we'll catch it on your
bad memory accesses,
and then you can just follow
the stack right to the problem.
So GuardMalloc has a lot more options.
You can put guards
against buffer underruns.
You can allow allocations
over 100 megabytes.
And you can do extra checking
before free and realloc calls.
You can also fill allocations
with bit patterns.
So you can tell which
memory you've filled up,
you've allocated,
and then you can detect if
you've read it by accident.
And there are more options
in the libgmalic man page.
These options are all
environment variables,
which you can then go set using
the executable inspector and set
the environment variables like
I showed you in the first demo.
And now let's get Jim back up here
real quick for a guard malloc demo.
So again, this one.
So I'm not going to show you
anything particularly interesting,
just to show you that it works
and how you turn it on and stuff.
You know, this is the classic mistake.
I made a buffer to hold a string,
but I forgot to allocate
the space for the null,
right?
And then I wrote some stuff
into it and overwrote it.
So if you do this and you just run it,
then, I mean, it just runs fine.
Nothing happened, right?
There was no mistake.
But there actually was a mistake,
which as your program got
more and more complicated,
you would eventually come across.
So what's better is to run under
GuardMalloc when you're worried about,
I have some weird behavior,
or maybe it happened upstream,
I don't know where, but I can catch it.
And again, that's easy to do.
That's just a menu pick,
enable GuardMalloc.
If you want some of the fancy options,
you need to go into the executables
tab and set environment variables,
as Chris said, but we're not going to
need to do that here.
All we need to do is just debug it.
So we get a bad access right
when we did the strcpy,
which is what you expect because we
went one character past the end of the
buffer we allocated to write the null,
which we hadn't allocated,
and it just gets us right away.
So that weird zero,
which ended up showing up in some
other data structure somewhere,
you can't figure out why.
You figure out why immediately.
So that's what guard malloc is for.
Let's go back to slides.
Go back there.
MIKE MCCURRY: Thanks, Jim.
So with fix and continue,
which we introduced a year ago,
it allows you to change your code while
you're debugging your application.
You can make the changes while
you're running the application,
and you can continue your
debug session without having
to do a recompile and relink.
So it allows for more of a
prototype style development.
It's extremely useful for those
long debugging sessions whenever you
have a bunch of program states set
up and you want to do some simple
changes to try and fix your program.
However,
it requires that you use native targets,
which is the default for most new
targets that you create in Xcode.
And of course, it requires GCC 3.3.
Now new in Xcode 1.5 and 2.0,
we have support for fixing
and supporting projects.
So if your application is in one project,
and you have supporting
frameworks in other projects,
you can now fix the code in
those frameworks while you're
debugging your application.
This requires that all of your
projects need to be built with
debugging symbols enabled,
so probably just the
development build style.
"FiX and Continue" needs to be enabled,
and if you're using C++,
you need to enable ZeroLink as well.
Now, all these projects need to be
open in Xcode at the same time,
so we can go find which target has
the file that you're trying to fix.
So what can you fix?
You can change logic,
you can add new calls,
you can delete code,
you can change constants,
and some other common operations.
Things that won't work.
You can't change the size of structures,
or class layouts, or function signatures.
You can't add global and static data.
And if you happen to be trying to fix
the frame that's at the top of the stack,
you can't add local data.
And if you do make changes
that require initialization,
then you need to be--
after you do the fix,
you need to make sure to move
the PC back to execute the line
of code to initialize your data.
Let's get Jason up here for
our "Fix and Continue." Thanks,
Christopher.
So, can we get the demo machine up,
please?
Thank you.
We're going to be looking
at the Sketch project again,
because it's our favorite project of all.
Christopher has split it into two parts,
a framework and an application,
so that we can show the support for
the supporting projects in "Fix and
Continue" that's new in this release.
Unfortunately, it's not actually working
in the Tiger seed,
but we're going to have
it fixed by the end.
So just bear with us for now,
but it's going to be in the final Tiger.
So here, you see on the screen,
we have the framework project,
right here,
and we have the application project.
Both of them have been built already.
So we're going to launch
them in the debugger.
in the little hard drive spins.
Here we go.
So the basic thing, we get a circle,
it's filled with blue,
probably not what we actually intended,
so this is a great chance to use fix
and continue to change the behavior of
the program without having to restart it
and relink it and recompile and all that
other stuff that you have to do normally.
So the thing that we're going
to fix is over in the framework,
so over here we're
looking for SKT rectangle,
which has the rectangle class.
Here it is, and we have the setup
function right here.
So let's set a breakpoint there.
And let's draw another circle, square,
rectangle.
Here we have a chance to change the
color that it's using for the fill.
Right now it's setting blue.
Let's change that to red.
Because maybe that's what
we actually intended,
because red rectangles are
what everybody needs more of.
Now we're going to say
"Save it" and "Fix."
"Piles the file, links succeed,
and fixed." Now,
if I continued at this point,
as you can see,
the PC is already past the
point where it sets the color.
So even though we fixed it,
the color's already been set.
We need to move the PC back a
couple of lines so it's going
to set it to the new color.
If we drew another rectangle after this,
it would get the new color,
but we want it on this rectangle.
So let's drag the PC back.
Up towards setting red color,
and then continue from there.
Unfortunately,
I drew a really small rectangle.
Let's just disable that
breakpoint for a second.
There would be a redirect if it worked.
Now we have read.
It's "Fix and Continue" just
like you've always seen it.
But you'll notice that the application,
which we're debugging,
is in a separate project from the
framework where we're "Fix and
Continuing." So the supporting project
is the really exciting new thing here.
One caveat that's important to
understand is that a file can
belong to multiple targets.
So what you have to do if you're "Fix
and Continue" a file that's in multiple
targets in a supporting project,
you're going to have to give
Xcode a little hint as to which
target it is you're fixing.
So for instance, let's do this again.
Over in the framework,
let's duplicate the target so we have two
targets with all the same files in them.
Duplicate it, and we'll just call it a
separate name so that it's clear.
Now we have two frameworks
with the same file in it.
Again, we're going to--well,
we won't stop at the breakpoint.
We can fix and continue without
getting to the breakpoint.
In fact, it has fewer limitations.
Fix and continue when you stopped
in the middle of a function
has a number of limitations on
changing that particular function.
So instead let's just run in the main
event loop and do the fix from there.
So instead of red color,
I think green color would
be a much better color.
Save it.
Now when we try to fix it,
which we'll do from the debugger,
Thank you.
There, OK.
Fix?
Now we get this pop-up.
And this pop-up is asking us which
target it is we're trying to fix so
that it knows how to process it and
get it back into the executable.
So we tell it that it's Sketch Framework.
"Build succeeded.
It's fixed.
Now we get the green one."
One really nice feature is that once
you've told it which target it is,
it's going to cache that and
remember it in the project.
So now if you do a different color,
we fix it again, it remembered that we're
working with Sketch Framework.
So you only have to actually
do the selection once,
and from then on, it's just the default.
and we get a brown one.
So that's the new "Fix and
Continue" supporting projects.
Thank you, Christopher.
CHRIS FRESEN: Thanks, Jason.
We can go back to slides.
So now, whether it be across your cubicle
or maybe just down the hall,
we bring you remote debugging.
This is great for debugging
those full-screen applications,
games, screen savers.
In fact, some games we know have had
bugs in full-screen mode only,
and so the only way they've been
able to debug these is to go to
the terminal on another machine,
SSHN, and fire up GDB.
So they don't have the advantage
of the graphical debugger.
It's also great for
debugging event handling.
So you're trying to drag the mouse,
and you want to debug at the same time.
Now what happens normally is,
Xcode's going to have to come
up if you've hit a breakpoint.
And now you aren't going to be able to
move the mouse anymore in your program.
So, with remote debugging,
you can now continue to use the
mouse as you debug your application.
And it supports nearly
all of Xcode's features.
In your seed,
it doesn't support "Fix and Continue."
should be pretty easy to fix.
For now, one thing you won't be able to
do is you won't be able to send
standard in to your remote process.
So you won't be using this to debug
your command line applications
remotely on another machine.
There's a little bit of
setup for remote debugging.
You need two machines, of course.
And remote login, SSH login,
needs to be enabled
on the remote machine.
Now you need to share the build products,
especially if you built with ZeroLink.
That's because ZeroLink's looking
for the other .Os that it's created
A specific path.
So if you're using a
network home directory,
that's quite easy.
Both machines will have access to the
build products with the same path.
If you're using AFP to share
from one machine to the other,
then you might have to use symbolic
links in order to fix up the path so that
it's the same access on both machines.
Note that finder aliases
won't work currently,
so you'll need to use symbolic links.
To enable remote debugging,
you bring up the executable inspector,
you check the debug
executable remotely with SSH,
and then you fill in the host text
field with the user name on the remote
machine that you're going to log in as,
and either an IP address or a host name.
Now you need to make sure that the user
that you're logged in as is the same
user that's logged in at that machine.
Otherwise you won't have permission
to write to the Windows server,
and your graphical
application will not launch.
So we're using SSH public
key authentication.
You need to set up your public and
private keys on the remote machine.
Xcode is SSH-agent aware,
so you can encrypt your private key,
and it's not a big hassle to
enter your passphrase once,
and then you don't need to
enter it again until you quit
Xcode or reboot the machine.
There's some documentation
on how to set all of this up,
because we don't expect you to pick it
up the first time you run through it.
In fact, we're not going to run
through the whole setup here.
And that documentation is called
"Remote Debugging with Xcode,"
and that's at connect.apple.com,
Reference Library, and Tools.
Now let's bring up Jim for a
quick demo of remote debugging.
Quick, because we're running out of time.
So let's start over here.
So we have one already set up.
Let me just open up the application and
the framework that goes along with it.
So this machine is another G5.
This is the one we're working on here.
I just want to debug.
I'm going to set-- OK.
So the first thing you have to
see is this is the Sketch.app.
That's the main project,
and I need to make sure that
the current executable is
set up for remote debugging.
That's what I have to do
on the host machine side.
So there's that nice little
Edit Active Executable.
You can get up to here.
Look in the debugging tab.
So you check this checkbox,
Debug Executable Remotely via SSH.
You have to type in the host and
username and IP address of the host.
And that's all.
I have to get that right.
You had to set up the SSH.
I'm not going to show you that,
because that would involve typing.
And you saw how that worked last time.
So we're not going to do that.
OK, but then once that's set up,
then it's just a matter of debugging.
It's going to ask me for my
SSH password because I don't
have an SSH agent running,
and I don't have any of the freeware
that does SSH and passes it down
to applications or shareware.
But it'll only ask me once.
Once I've typed it in,
if I debugged again,
it wouldn't ask me again because it sets
up an SSH agent itself and then uses
that agent for the rest of the session.
So we'll wait a little bit.
OK, can you switch to this
machine for just one second?
So just to prove to you that it is here,
it's running,
it's running under the debugger, you can,
you know, do whatever, set, and...
That's interesting.
OK.
Hit breakpoints over here.
So let's go back to this one for a sec.
So see, I hit some nice breakpoint,
now I'm here,
I can step around or whatever.
The one thing that we saw here was,
you know, what I wanted to do was,
I was stroking out a rectangle and
I wanted to actually get away from,
you know, watch the mouse events as I was
stroking out the rectangle over here.
But one of the things that's
kind of inconvenient is,
you know, okay,
so I click down and then it was great.
I stopped immediately at
the mouse up event here,
which is what you see,
the event is mouse down,
mouse down event rather.
But now, you know, this mouse,
I've got to like, you know,
put a sock full of rice on the mouse
to hold the mouse button down and then
slowly move it and then take the sock
off for the mouse button up or whatever.
There's actually some,
one thing that's really neat that
you can use in the universal access
stuff which can make this kind
of event level remote debugging,
which is, that's what remote debugging,
if you're, full screen games and then
for regular applications,
just like, you know,
I have a tracking loop and I want
to debug through a tracking loop,
you know, how do I do that,
then there's one thing that
I want to show you that will
make that that more convenient.
So let's go back over here.
So what you can do is,
if you go to Universal Access in
System Preferences and turn
on the Mouse Keys feature,
"I have universal access
in the mouse keys.
So you turn that on and then
what that does is that makes the
keys into the mouse movement,
but one of the really cool things is that
it has separate keys for the mouse down,
not mouse click, but just mouse down.
That's the zero key.
And then the five key is the
mouse up and then the arrow
keys are the movement keys.
So if we switch back
over to this machine,
oh we didn't ever go here.
Okay.
So I hit mouse down here and
see I've broken the mouse down.
And then if I continue, I can
And then,
I can click and get the mouse move and,
you know,
continue and keep getting the mouse move.
And I can go and I can, you know,
have both hands and I don't have to worry
about holding down the mouse button.
And then eventually, you know,
when I get to the point where
I want to make the rectangle,
I have to continue, of course,
and I can finally click the 5 and
that's when I get the mouse up.
So that's, that, that'll, you know,
free your hands and you don't
have to get your child to come and
hold the mouse down or whatever.
The one other thing that's here,
by the way,
this was not one that we added.
I mean, the event is an NS event
and as we were going along,
it was really convenient.
I wanted to see what type of
event I was getting because I was,
you know, making events over here and
then looking at them over here.
So again,
we just added a custom data formatter.
It turns out that under the event,
one of the member elements is the
underscore type that has the type
of the event and I was annoyed
at having to turn that out.
So I just put it up there.
So that's just, again,
the data format is really close.
Like, I want to see that now.
Right.
Okay.
That's good.
Can you go back to slides?
Thanks, Jim.
So now we need to finish things
up so we can take some of
your questions really quick.
This is the reference library.
There's remote debugging in Xcode,
which we talked about earlier.
There's a document on "Fix and
Continue." There's debugging with GDB,
which is more in-depth than GDB,
command line commands.
And of course we have Xcode Help,
which is built right
into the application.
It's a great resource to go look at.
We encourage you to do that.
And now who to contact?
Matthew Formica.